docs: explain user sessions and session timeouts (#19128)
supabase/supabase: apps/docs/pages/guides/auth/sessions.mdx

  id: 'sessions',
  title: 'User Sessions',
  description: 'Control and manage user sessions.',
}

Supabase Auth provides fine-grained control over your user's sessions.

A session is created when a user signs in. It is represented by the Supabase Auth access token in the form of a JWT, and a refresh token which is a unique string.

Access tokens are designed to be short lived, usually between 5 minutes and 1 hour. You can exchange a refresh token only once to get a new access and refresh token pair.

This process is called **refreshing the session.** 

A session terminates, depending on configuration, when:

- The user clicks sign out.
- The user changes their password or performs a security sensitive action.
- It times out due to inactivity.
- It reaches its maximum lifetime.

## Access token (JWT) claims

Every access token contains a `session_id` claim, a UUID, uniquely identifying the session of the user. You can correlate this ID with the primary key of the `auth.sessions` table.

## Sign out and scopes

Supabase Auth allows you to specify three different scopes for when a user invokes the [sign out API](/docs/reference/javascript/auth-signout) in your application:

> - Global (default) when all sessions active for the user are terminated.

Author: Yeah good idea. Avoids the repetition below.

- Local, to only terminate the current session for the user but keep sessions on other devices or browsers active.
- Others, to terminate all but the current session for the user.

You can invoke these by providing the `scope` option:

```typescript
await supabase.auth.signOut()
// is equivalent to
await supabase.auth.signOut({ scope: 'global' })
```

Use `local` or `others` for the rest.

> Upon sign out all refresh tokens and potentially other database objects related to the affected sessions are destroyed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon sign out, all refresh tokens and potentially other database objects related to the affected sessions are destroyed.
```

Be aware that access tokens of revoked sessions remain valid until their expiry time encoded in the `exp` claim.

## Controlling the lifetime of a session

<Admonition type="note">

This feature is only available on Pro plans and up.

</Admonition>

> Supabase Auth can be configured to limit the lifetime of a user's session. By default, all sessions are active until the user clicks sign out or performs some other action that terminates a session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supabase Auth can be configured to limit the lifetime of a user's session. By default, all sessions are active until the user signs out or performs some other action that terminates a session.
```

> In some applications, it's useful or required from a security point of view to ensure that users authenticate often, or that sessions are not left active on devices for too long.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some applications, it's useful or required for security to ensure that users authenticate often, or that sessions are not left active on devices for too long.
```

> There are two ways in which you can limit the lifetime of a session:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to limit the lifetime of a session:
```

> - By enabling time-boxed sessions which terminate after a fixed amount of time.
> - By enabling inactivity timeout sessions that have not been refreshed for a while will be regarded as terminated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- By enabling time-boxed sessions, which terminate after a fixed amount of time.
- By enabling inactivity timeout, which terminates sessions that haven't been refreshed for a while.
```

To make sure that users are required to re-authenticate periodically, you can set a positive value for the _Time-box user sessions_ option in the [Auth settings](/dashboard/project/_/settings/auth) for your project.

To make sure that sessions expire after a period of inactivity, you can set a positive duration for the _Inactivity timeout_ option in the [Auth settings](/dashboard/project/_/settings/auth).

> Sessions are not proactively destroyed when you change these settings, but rather the check is enforced whenever a session is refreshed next. Otherwise sessions are progressively cleaned up 24 hours after they expire, which prevents you from causing a high load on your database by accident and allows you some freedom to undo changes without adversely affecting all users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sessions are not proactively destroyed when you change these settings. The check is enforced when the session is next refreshed. Otherwise sessions are progressively cleaned up 24 hours after they expire, which prevents you from causing a high load on your database by accident and allows you some freedom to undo changes without adversely affecting all users.
```

a bit confused about what the `otherwise` is referring to here. what are the two possible cases?

Author: Hmm ok I'll re-write it. The idea is that the effect is immediate, but not the changes in the database that lag 24 hours and happen progressively to help them avoid minor mistakes that log everyone out.

## Frequently asked questions

### What are recommended values for access token (JWT) expiration?

Most applications should use the default expiration time of 1 hour. This can be customized in your project's [Auth settings](/dashboard/project/_/settings/auth) in the Advanced Settings section.

Setting a value over 1 hour is generally discouraged for security reasons, but it may make sense in certain situations.

> Values below 5 minutes, and especially below 2 minutes should not be used in most situations because:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values below 5 minutes, and especially below 2 minutes, should not be used in most situations because:
```

> - The shorter the expiration time, the more frequently refresh tokens are used, which increases the load and reliance on the Auth server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The shorter the expiration time, the more frequently refresh tokens are used, which increases the load on the Auth server.
```

> - Time is not absolute. Servers can often be off sync for tens of seconds, but user devices like laptops, desktops or mobile devices can sometimes be off in minutes or even hours. Having too short expiration time can cause difficult to debug errors due to clock skew.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Time is not absolute. Servers can often be off sync for tens of seconds, but user devices like laptops, desktops or mobile devices can sometimes be off by minutes or even hours. Having too short expiration time can cause difficult-to-debug errors due to clock skew.
```

> - Supabase's client libraries always try to refresh the session ahead of time which won't be possible if the expiration time is too short.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Supabase's client libraries always try to refresh the session ahead of time, which won't be possible if the expiration time is too short.
```

> - Access tokens should generally be valid at least as much as the longest running request in your application. This helps you avoid issues where the access token becomes invalid mid way through processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access tokens should generally be valid for at least as long as the longest running request in your application. This helps you avoid issues where the access token becomes invalid midway through processing.
```

Should the reuse attempt not fall under these two exceptions, the whole session is regarded as terminated and all refresh tokens belonging to it are marked as revoked. You can switch off this behavior in the Advanced Settings of the [Auth settings](/dashboard/project/_/settings/auth) page, though it is generally not recommended.

The purpose of this mechanism is to guard against potential security issues where a refresh token could have been stolen from the user, for example by exposing it accidentally in logs that leak (like logging cookies, request bodies or URL params) or via vulnerable third-party servers. It does not guard against the case where a user's session is stolen from their device.

### What are the benefits of using access and refresh tokens instead of traditional sessions?

Traditionally user sessions were implemented by using a unique string stored in cookies that identified the authorization that the user had on a specific browser. Applications would use this unique string to constantly fetch the attached user information on every API call.

> This approach has some significant technical drawbacks, as it meant that the authentication server and database was central and inseparable from the entirety of the application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach has some significant technical drawbacks, as it means that the authentication server and database are central and inseparable from the entirety of the application:
```

> - Requirement to be always available and performant. If the authentication server or its database crashed or wasn't available for even a few seconds, the whole application went down. Scheduling maintenance or dealing with transient errors often became impossible to manage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Requirement to be always available and performant. If the authentication server or its database crashes or is unavailable for even a few seconds, the whole application goes down. Scheduling maintenance or dealing with transient errors becomes very difficult.
```

if it is truly absolutely impossible, then stick with that, but if not, err on the side of just very difficult 😄

> - A failing authentication server could cause a chain of failures across other systems and APIs, paralyzing the whole application system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A failing authentication server can cause a chain of failures across other systems and APIs, paralyzing the whole application system.
```

- It is generally very hard to globally distribute workloads for authentication, so this causes a situation where all requests experience the latency to communicate with this primary region.

Access and refresh tokens are therefore a better approach because the session information is encoded in a short-lived token -- the access token -- which can be transferred across APIs and systems without relying on the availability or performance of a central server. An application can thus tolerate transient failures or performance issues a lot better. By trying to refresh the access token ahead of time, your application can safely continue to function even with larger outages.

It's better for cost optimization and scaling as well, as the authentication system's servers and database only handle traffic for this use case.

### How do I make sure that an access token (JWT) cannot be used after a user clicks sign out?

Most applications rarely need such strong guarantees. Consider adjusting the JWT expiry time to an acceptable value. If this is still necessary, you should try to use this validation logic only for the most sensitive actions within your application.

> When a user clicks sign out, the sessions affected by the logout are removed from the database entirely. You can check that the `session_id` claim in the JWT corresponds to a row in the `auth.sessions` table. If such a row does not exist, it means that the user has logged out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user signs out, the sessions affected by the logout are removed from the database entirely. You can check that the `session_id` claim in the JWT corresponds to a row in the `auth.sessions` table. If such a row does not exist, it means that the user has logged out.
```

Note that sessions are not proactively terminated when their maximum lifetime (time-box) or inactivity timeout are reached. These sessions are cleaned up progressively 24 hours after reaching that status. This allows you to tweak the values or roll back changes without causing unintended user friction.

### Can I use HTTP-Only cookies to store the access and refresh tokens?

This is possible, but only for apps that use the traditional server-only web app approach where all of the application logic is implemented on the server and it returns rendered HTML only.

> If your app uses any client side JavaScript to build a rich user experience, using HTTP-Only cookies is not possible since only your server will be able to see and refresh the session of the user; while the browser would not have access to the access and refresh token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your app uses any client side JavaScript to build a rich user experience, using HTTP-Only cookies is not possible since only your server will be able to see and refresh the session of the user. The browser would not have access to the access and refresh token.
```

Because of this, the Supabase JavaScript libraries provide only limited support. You can override the `storage` option when creating the Supabase client *on the server* to store the values in cookies or other adequate storage, like so:

```typescript
import { createClient } from '@supabase/supabase-js'

const supabase = createClient(SUPABASE_URL, SUPABASE_ANON_KEY, {
  auth: {
    storage: customStorageObject,
  },
})
```

The `customStorageObject` should implement the [`localStorage` API interface](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/localStorage).

> When using cookies to store access and refresh tokens, make sure that the [`Expires` or `Max-Age` attributes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Set-Cookie#attributes) of the cookies is set to a timestamp very far into the future. Browsers will clear the cookies, but the session will remain active in Supabase Auth. Therefore it's best if you let Supabase Auth control the validity of these tokens and instruct the browser to always store the cookies indefinitely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using cookies to store access and refresh tokens, make sure that the [`Expires` or `Max-Age` attributes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Set-Cookie#attributes) of the cookies is set to a timestamp very far into the future. Browsers will clear the cookies, but the session will remain active in Supabase Auth. Therefore it's best to let Supabase Auth control the validity of these tokens and instruct the browser to always store the cookies indefinitely.
```
